---
layout: post
title: "Intro"
subtitle: "Introduction will go here"
section: app-building
---

### How to think about designing a program

When building an application, the smart approach is usually to build one step at a time. Typically that means getting something simple to show up on the page, and then adding in functionality once you have something to show.

That being said, it's natural to feel a very strong temptation to plan everything out up front. I often feel like I need to come up with a grand architecture for a program where every piece fits together seamlessly and efficiently, or that I need to have an answer ready for every question someone might ask about my app.

But creative disciplines rarely require such foresight. Coding is a form of creative expression like any other. Think about how authors write books. Sure, there's usually an outline of the underlying story they want to tell and a rough order of the way things should happen. But authors usually just start writing and see where the story takes them, rather than planning everything out ahead of time. The result is that writing feels organic and enjoyable. The same is true of song writers - they play around with a few riffs that sound good together and build up a song around them.

You could even look at evolution itself as another example. There's no grand design that every animal is evolving towards. Mutations just kind of happen by chance and the ones that work out stick around. If we were to redesign humans from the ground up, there are lots of things we would do differently - why can't the spinal cord repair itself after an injury? But the truth is that there's no way of knowing ahead of time what is worth spending your time planning and developing. And if you try to design a perfect architecture for your program, you'll find that you waste a lot of time on things that are unimportant or never get used.

Some foresight can be a good thing. As you gain experience, you start to get a feel for what areas are worth thinking through and what paths will lead to nowhere. But without building lots of programs, there's no way to know ahead of time what is or is not worth thinking about. So until you get that experience it's simpler and more enjoyable to just *build*, and see where the program takes you. Don't worry about making every line of your code as efficient as possible, worry about making something that works and then go back to improve the areas that become problems.

### Getting set up

Let's build something now. Our first app is going to have two main features:
  * It lets you search for a certain category of pictures
  * It shows a GIF from that category on the page

That's pretty much it. It's a simple app on the surface, but we'll need to use some advanced concepts that will teach us some important coding skills and will allow us to move up to building more complex applications.

We can start with either the display of the page or its functionality. I'm a visual person, and I like being able to see what I'm working on. So to me it makes sense to start with simply showing an image and our search bar, rather than starting with functionality that is more difficult to visualize.

So let's get an image and show it on the page. We'll be using the online code editor at [elm-lang.org/try](http://www.elm-lang.org/try) to keep the startup costs low and not to have to install anything yet.
