---
layout: post
title: "Elm <strong>Links</strong>"
subtitle: "The <strong>core</strong> of the Web"
section: elm
---

Let's look at the code we wrote again.

{% highlight haskell %}
import Html

main = Html.text "Sucking at something is the first step towards being sorta good at something."
{% endhighlight %}

The first line with `import Html` is a **command**, which is another type of word that we'll come back to soon.

The second line says to create a new word called `main` and define it to be `Html.text "Sucking at something is the first step towards being sorta good at something."`

We use the `=` function to make new words. `=` is a function that takes two inputs:
1. A **name** to call the function, which we put on the left
2. A **definition** for the function, which we put on the right

So why on earth would we want to make a new word called `main`?

The answer is that many programming languages (like Elm) are designed to look for a `main` function to run at the beginning of the program. This is a way to start our program off. Elm takes the definition of the `main` function that we wrote, runs it, and shows the output on the screen.

But `main` is very particular about the kinds of things it is willing to show on the screen. Think of it as a vegan. It won't accept just *anything* and show it on the screen. It only considers showing a certain type of output.

A **type** is a word for a category that we decide something falls into. There are lots of different types.

`'a'` is a **Character** type, because its a single letter. Character types always go in single quotes. We capitalize the names of types to make them easier to tell apart from other kinds of words like functions.

**List** is a type that can hold another type. Just like Characters go inside `' '`, Lists go inside square brackets (`[ ]`). To make things clearer, each item in a list is separated by a comma.

Say you have a bunch of Characters:
  * `'h'`
  * `'e'`
  * `'l'`
  * `'l'`
  * `'o'`

Single letters are great, but sometimes we want to put them together to make words. We can string letters together to make words by putting them inside a List, like this:

`['h', 'e', 'l', 'l', 'o']`  

As you might imagine, having to type this out would get annoying real quick. Fortunately, there's an easier way.

Since we want to talk about words in our programs pretty often, there's another type that exists as a kind of shorthand for Lists of Characters. It's called a **String**, and we make one with double quotes (`" "`).

{% highlight haskell %}
"Who's this Rorschach dude and why is he so good at drawing pictures of my dad beating me?"
{% endhighlight %}

So why double quotes? Let's switch back to English for a moment. I'm going to tell you to do something.

**Say your name.**

The two words "your" and "name" combine to make an expression that represents a specific name: **yours**.

**Say "your name"**

This sentence means to literally say the words in quotations - there's no meaning behind them.

Coding uses the same idea. If we are writing code and want to talk about actual letters or words themselves, rather than the ideas they represent, we put the letters in quotations.

So to recap:
* Single letters go in single quotes, and we call them *Characters*
* Multiple letters go in double quotes, and we call them *Strings*
