---
layout: post
title: "Giphy"
subtitle: "What we're going to make"
section: elm
example: giphy
---


---

### Learning to code by building apps

Programming is usually taught by starting with a few basic concepts:
  * variables
  * conditions
  * syntax
  * data structures

The idea is that once you understand the fundamentals, complex programs will make sense. The trouble is that you have no idea what is important to understand and how it all fits together, and so it's easy to give up before it clicks.

When I first started to learn programming, I had some big questions that went unanswered for a long time. I remember thinking to myself, "why do we have to learn a language just to program? It's 2016, isn't there an app to make this easier?" or "There are a million functions in the documentation for this language, how do I know which ones are important to know and which ones I can lookup later?"

The goal of this site is to teach you how to learn to program. You won't know every language or framework, but you will know the main ideas that are common across every language.

Instead of starting with syntax, we'll build an app that gets GIFs and draws them on the page. The goal is less about understanding everything shown here and more about getting a feel for what a real program actually looks like. That way, when you go back to learn the fundamentals you'll know why you need to understand each idea.

Lots of courses teach programming using a single language, say Python or Java. The benefit is that you can become comfortable with one way of doing things. But I actually think this is a mistake for new developers. If you have only been exposed to one language, you waste a lot of time trying to make the problem fit into your language's way of doing things, when you could solve it easily using another language or technique.

We'll learn enough of a few languages to understand the core problem solving techniques that are common between every language and then start to see how different languages are better at solving different problems.

The language we'll start with is called Elm. It's a modern language developed to fix a lot of the pains developers face in traditional languages like Javascript, and is a great language to learn how to program with. It's also especially easy to get started with, since you can make basic programs online without installing anything.

*[variables]: names for data
*[conditions]: rules for when to do one thing versus another
*[syntax]: rules for how to order words in a language
*[data structures]: categories for data, like Character for letters or Integer for numbers
