---
layout: post
title: "model"
subtitle: "Starting to build our program"
section: app-building
---

### The update

So now we've split our program into a model and a view. But it's still *static*! It seems like we did a lot of work for nothing, but that's just because we're missing the third and final piece of the puzzle: the **update**.

The update is where the magic happens. It's where we describe what to do depending on what changes in our program.

We need to make an update function. Let's ask ourselves the same questions we ask every time we make a new function:
  1. What should the function give back when it's done running?
  2. What information does the function need to do its job?

What will `update` give back when it's done running?
{: .info}
We always keep the current state of the program in the model, so it makes sense to have `update` give back a new model when it's done running.

What does `update` need in order to give us back a new model? 
{: .info}
It needs to know *what changed*, and it needs the *current model* so that it can change it. That means `update` will have two inputs.

Let's write the skeleton of the function and then figure out the details after. We need a single word for each input, so we'll call what changes the "message" and the model the "model".

{% highlight haskell %}
update message model =
  -- react to changes and give back a new model

{% endhighlight %}

Now we need to think about what messages `update` might receive that it has to react to. Our app has three buttons. We could use a message like "button clicked", but it wouldn't be specific enough to tell us which button was pressed and which type of picture should be shown. Instead, we'll have three different messages which represent each button being clicked:
  * "asked for cats"
  * "asked for dogs"
  * "asked for ice cream"
  
A message can be any type, but it seems natural to start with a String of words - like a real message.

Let's put our messages in the `update` function. This won't do anything yet, we're just adding them in to work with.

{% highlight haskell %}
update message model =
  -- react to three messages:
  "asked for cats"
  "asked for dogs"
  "asked for ice cream"
{% endhighlight %}

We will only ever receive one message at a time. So we need a way to make the update function do different things depending on which of the three messages it receives.

One way is to use an `if` expression. This is a way of providing control over which way a program runs.

Here's what we want to do in English. We'll translate it into Elm in a second.

{% highlight markdown %}
If the message is "asked for cats", give back a new model where the title is "cats" and the image location is a cat picture. Otherwise, skip this line and check if the message matches any other patterns here.

If the message is "asked for dogs", give back a new model where the title is "dogs" and the image location is a dog picture. Otherwise, skip this line and check if the message matches any other patterns here.

If the message is "asked for ice cream", give back a new model where the title is "ice cream" and the image location is an ice cream picture. Otherwise, we must have gotten a message that we don't know what to do with, so just give back the old model.
{% endhighlight %}

You'll notice every statement above follows a pattern. There are always three parts: 
  1. a **conditional** expression after "if" that is tested, e.g.
  
  the message is "asked for dogs"
  {: .info}
  2. an expression to run if the conditional is matched, e.g. 
  
  give back a new model where the title is "dogs" and the image location is a dog picture
  {: .info} 
  3. an expression to run if the conditional isn't matched, e.g.
  
  skip this line and check if the message matches any other patterns here
  {: .info}
  

Every `if` statement follows this pattern.

In Elm, we apply this pattern in a specific way. We write,

{% highlight haskell %}
if {-conditional-} then {-run this expression-} else {-run this expression instead-}
{% endhighlight %}

The expressions after "then" and "else" can be any old expression that we're used to writing. But conditionals are a special kind of expression that we haven't learned yet. Conditional expressions are basically tests that can either pass or fail. We make a claim, and if the claim is correct, the computer runs the `then` expression and the `else` expression is completely skipped. If it's incorrect, it runs the `else` expression instead. 

That means that a conditional can only ever be true or false


The key point here is that the model, view, and update work together to react to changes. It's hard to talk about each component separately, because they're all dependent on one another.

Let's see how the update works with the model and view. We'll start with the view.

The view we've created so far isn't the whole story. We left out the part that makes it alive. 

Right now, we've got our `view` giving back a value of type Html. We need 

if / else

refactoring to case to make it cleaner

*[statement]: A generic word not specific to programming meaning "an expression of something's current condition"
