---
layout: post
title: "Python"
section: solving-problems
comments: true
---

### Reverse a string

#### Goal: Write a function that reverses a String.

Python has Lists just like Elm. And just like in Elm, Strings can be visualized as Lists of Characters. Every letter in a String has a position, usually called an **index**, and a value. Indexes start at 0.

For example, in the String "I wish I was a baller", every letter has an index.

<div class="table">
  <table>
    <tr>
      <th>Index</th>
      <td>0</td>
      <td>1</td>
      <td>2</td>
      <td>3</td>
      <td>4</td>
      <td>5</td>
      <td>6</td>
      <td>7</td>
      <td>8</td>
      <td>9</td>
      <td>10</td>
      <td>11</td>
      <td>...</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>Letter</th>
      <td>I</td>
      <td> </td>
      <td>w</td>
      <td>i</td>
      <td>s</td>
      <td>h</td>
      <td> </td>
      <td>I</td>
      <td> </td>
      <td>w</td>
      <td>a</td>
      <td>s</td>
      <td>...</td>
    </tr>
  </table>
</div>

Why do we start at 0? Well, there's a very good reason. Remember how confusing it was when you were a kid and you learned that the "first century" starts at 0 AD? That's because the list of centuries starts at **1**. The first century is 0-99, the second century is 100-199, and so on. Every century is off by 1 whenever we talk about it.

In Python, we don't have that problem. We can talk about the "zeroth" element of a List, which makes knowing the length of a List much easier - it's the same as the index of the last element.

Let's think about how we would reverse a List in Python. Python has **slice notation**, which lets you create new Lists from slices of existing Lists. To access an element at a specific index in a List, we use `[ ]`. And to create a new List using slice notation, we just say what indexes we want to take from the existing List.

{% highlight python %}
# "String"[start:end]
"I wish I was a baller"[0:12] # index 0 to 12 (not including 12)
"I wish I was a baller"[1:13] # index 1 to 13 (not including 13)
"I wish I was a baller"[5:]   # index 5 to end
"I wish I was a baller"[:]    # start to end
{% endhighlight %}

Python's slice notation also allows us to add an optional, third input to the slice: the **step size** that we want to use to walk through the List.

{% highlight python %}
# "String"[start:end:stepSize]
"I wish I was a baller"[0:12:1] # index 0 to 12 (not including 12)
"I wish I was a baller"[0:12:2] # index 0 to 12, step size of 2
"I wish I was a baller"[5::2]   # index 5 to end, step size of 2
"I wish I was a baller"[::2]    # start to end, step size of 2
{% endhighlight %}

We can also use *negative* indexes to start from the end of the List.

{% highlight python %}
"I wish I was a baller"[-12:-1] # index 12 to 1, both starting from end
"I wish I was a baller"[-5:]    # index 5 (starting from end) to end
"I wish I was a baller"[::-2]   # start to end, every second letter, from end
{% endhighlight %}

### The problem

How could we use negative indexes to write a function that creates a new, reversed String from an existing String?

<button class="hints">Hint</button>
<ul class="hintsBlock"></ul>

<textarea style="border-radius: 10px" id="code" name="code">
def reverse(string):
  return string # use List slicing

print reverse("Yo what's up")
</textarea>

<script>
let hints = [
  "We want to use List slicing, which looks like 'A string'[start:end:step]",
  "We need the whole string, so we don't need to mess with the start or end indices",
  "Using a negative step size will start from the end of the String",
  "string[::-1] will give back the string in reverse"
]
let hintsButton = document.querySelector("button.hints")
let hintsBlock = document.querySelector(".hintsBlock")
let i = 0
hintsButton.onclick = function() {
  if (i >= hints.length) return
  let element = document.createElement("li")
  element.innerHTML = hints[i]
  hintsBlock.appendChild(element)
  i += 1
}
</script>
